I first started trying to model the wedge, but the immediate problem was isostasy. The descent of the wedge was not resisted by any beneath it so it just descended. So, I added what I thought was a useful isostatic constraint. I ran a model with zero displacement for the detachment and backstop and then used the stresses from that model as the baseline for other models. The trouble with that was that stresses were actually singular at the tip of the wedge. I wasn't sure why this was happening, so I hunted for numerical reasons for a long time and fought with the integration code. Eventually, I was convinced that the integration was working correctly, so I started looking elsewhere. That's when I realized that the Matlab pdetool solution I had been comparing against a little bit was completely wrong. The singularity was a real physical effect due to the zero displacement boundary condition. These kind of singularities are well known in the engineering finite element analysis world. In the process of finding that, I had fixed several bugs, so not all was lost.

Another difficulty arose with no interpenetration or opening constraints. Generally, we try to prevent material from overlapping, called "interpenetration". Also, the confining stresses are high enough at depth that a fault opening up and creating a void within the earth is also highly unlikely, so fault opening is assumed not to happen. In order to enforce these constraints, I had assumed that the slip in the normal direction across a fault is zero. However, that constraints conflicts at fault corners, resulting in zero slip. 

When I introduced many faults into the models... hinterland consumption of slip.

I needed India as well. Isostatic compensation depth. Something numerical. What is on the other side of the fault?

Fault bends require plasticity or internal faults. Duh, structural geology.

I spent the first year of my work on these problems focused on difficulties with the numerical methods I am using -- boundary element methods. I thought that work on those numerical methods was going to be the critical effort with this type of modelling. However, The theme that links all these stories together is that the physical modelling can be just as hard or harder than numerics. And in a lot of ways, the problems can be more interesting because understanding and solving them lends real physical insight.  
